name, your maiden name, and the whole work,
please, and how you came to be here, to that city.
Elizabeth Ann Harper John. Elizabeth Ann Harper
John, hence the Elizabeth A.H. John under which I
publish. I was born and reared in a little county
seat town, Marika, just across the Red River. And
as an undergraduate history major, I was working
for an honors project, honors thesis, at Oklahoma
College for Women, which no longer exists under
that name. It's now called Oklahoma University of
Sciences and Arts. And it's co-educational,
which I think is a bad move. But at any rate, I
started trying to document or to explain why every
time they plow down in the southeastern corner, of
Jefferson
County, and across the river in Montague County,
they turned up incredible quantities of the
plants, which I now know to be Indian, French, and
to a lesser degree, Spanish. And so I, nobody had
ever explained those things, and so I began
researching them. And that led me into this field.
And I discovered that they had been Wichita and
Calvias villages. And so trying to track those
Indians and understand what was going on led me
into the wonderful world of the Spanish
documents. And starting with that kind of
question, there's just never been any answer to
that. So it's
just been tremendously rewarding. But by the time
I finished my PhD at the University of Oklahoma at
Max Warhead, when I'd also done a master's degree
on the thesis, I mean on the Tau Bias. The master's
was in 51. The PhD was in 57. But by that time... No, I
never knew him. He was there later. I know of him,
because I have heard of him. But is he at A&M now? No,
he's dead. He retired about 10 years ago, 15, and
moved to Colorado, and he died. Didn't he have a
wife named Donnie? Originally, yes, and he
divorced about 10, came to A&M. Oh, and there was
that, oh yes, I remember, there was another woman
there. This was, oh yes, I remember. Yes, there was
tension. Yes, I remember that. But the reason I
knew her name was that she was a close friend of
Amy's. Okay, yes, that's right, because I knew
Dottie, we had met Dottie, you know, when I first
moved out, I liked her very much, and the next thing
I know, all this grew up in me. Right, and it put Max
in a very unfortunate position. He was very
uncomfortable, because I believe that the woman
whose name escapes me was representing herself as
a Moorhead student. Yeah, that's right. But,
all the shitheads in class is what they were. And
actually Max had to marry Houston. But, at any
rate, I met and married Peter at the university. By
the time I finished my PhD, We were off in New
Mexico, where his first job was after he finished
his doctorate. At the University of New Mexico?
The University of New Mexico, yeah. And I finished
my dissertation there, commuting to the Argos,
which was a wonderful... That's a perfect place
for another kind of interest. I couldn't have been
luckier. But by the time I finished the doctorate,
I had two emmits. Peter
quite properly decided that the University of New
Mexico was not a place to build
buildings. And they bailed out two industries in
California. So we moved to California in 1957. And
then... Where did he go? He went with the Chevron
Research Company standard oil at Richmond,
which, of course, placed me just up the road from
the Babcock Library. Yeah. Uh-huh. Wonderful
luck. And within a year, Peter was in addition to
his full-time job at At Chevron, he was also a
visiting part-time professor of statistics,
assistant professor of statistics at UC
Berkeley's stat
department. And so those were very interesting
years for us, living in the Bay Area then. I had
children in the Berkeley Cooperative Nursery
School once they were old enough and I had time off.
I was in the main bar. And then there was an opening
for him full time up at UC Davis. So we moved up
there. Do you like the switch from industry to
academia? Oh, I think he's an incorrigible . But
he's very grateful for his industrial
experience, and he learned so much, and he's still
using it. As a statistician, he does a lot of
industrial consulting, actually, and has a
comprehension of it that he
wouldn't have if he'd stayed that deep all his
life. Davis, where
we were from 61 to 67. I really didn't accomplish
very much with scholarly nature, because it
wasn't very convenient to go down to work with the
group, and I was very much absorbed with the
children. But once they were both established and
in grade school, then I began commuting over to San
Jose to teach full-time. and didn't really aspire
to a full-time job. But, after I'd been doing that a
year and a half, Gloria Klein resigned. The
Western History slot there, that came open, and
that was offered to me, and it was just too good to
sell. And so there I was, unexpectedly, with a
full-time tenure slot position, and
beginning to have serious doubts at the end of the
first year about how terrible that would be as the
children got into Catalyst, even though Peter was
marvelously cooperative and supportive. And
then the whole situation resolved itself because
we decided we wanted to get the children out of
California soon. a lot of families that were
serious about their children were bailing out of
California by then. Yeah, okay. Yeah, things were
just beginning. The funniest thing, and we were
upset about the California schools. We finally,
the last year we were there, pulled the children
out of the public school and had them in a little
ungraded, rather quirky private school that ran
mostly the faculty children. And one time Peter
drove the children away, dropped them off, came
back on the ground and saw the filthy speech
movement had started down in Berkeley. And of
course things filtered up to Davis from Berkeley.
Monkey seemed like a dude. And so the school
genius, and you know the top grade level of the
school was sixth grade, and it had been graded into
one. The school genius, who was the son of one of
Peter's colleagues, had organized a speech
demonstration, and he printed up placards, they
were marching, when Peter got there, and the
leader needed five letters to spell this
four-letter word. So
I thought, well, we've looked over the brink of the
21st century. It was so funny. But at any rate, we
felt that we would have a much sounder
environment.
And so anyhow, my consolation before
leaving
the teaching job, which I really enjoyed, was that
I would go to the library this year. I had had
actual... Excuse me. Peter comes to Texas? He
comes to UT. He joins the math department at UT for
his tennis. I had actually had a letter from OU
Press, from Savoy Library, sending me a reader's
report. Somebody other than Max had called his
attention to it and said it was something that
should be published as a book. And Savoy sent me
this report and told me what to do. Which was not
anything I wanted to do, because that would have
taken
the book in a direction I didn't want to go. But it
was out of the question at the time. I wasn't
teaching at all. I was dealing with a very sick
child for about a year. And I just wrote back and
said, but that gave me an inkling that Yeah, I had
something there. And I wasn't satisfied. I didn't
want to publish that, because my real interest, my
primary interest, was the Indians. And it was an
analysis, really, the Spanish policy toward the
Indians. And I wanted to do the Indian story. So
anyhow, I had that permanent in the back of my mind
when we got there, and I had some questions. As soon
as I got the household resettled, I went up to the
Berkley Library where Lorena Fran was so gracious
enough and took such good care of me. She chased me
out of the stairs one day. Did you do something like
that? No, she thought I did. She thought I had put a
piece of paper in my pocket or something, I think.
Couldn't you do that? Oh, she was fiercely
protective. And she retired when they moved up to
the new building. She did not want the library
taking away from the students, which was what
she... That's a good point. That's right. Now I
think, now knowing what I know also about the state
of her health and about the design of those stacks,
going
up and down those stairs in that building. That,
Ms. Dax, is really, you know, very, it's very
dangerous. And she was quite right to attack me.
But anyhow, I just had enormous good luck and was
able to combine that, or I was riding her and other
junior high school kids. And I had largely
completed the research by the time Peter accepted
an offer to go to the University of Kentucky. And so
I actually finished the manuscript in Lexington.
Peter had taken
a year's leave here, but he retained the caution.
He really expected to stay in Kentucky because it
was his stat department. His stat departments are
rarely entirely clinical associations. But he
was not well encouraged about Kentucky. I've got
the
university situation
there, and it was right there, so that skills were
triggered. And so that became my enormous relief.
The library there was nothing. Is that right?
Isn't that something? I don't know. I don't know. I
don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't
know. I don't know. It
was
the only time either Peter or I went away from this
country.
And I think there's always Peter, who is Welsh, and
has been in this country since 1949. He missed the
optimism of the West. And the old border states, it
is said, really, in many ways, were hit harder by
the war and the destruction in the Deep South
because they didn't have almost the fresh start of
the Deep South. I grew up with a strong obsession
with the Civil War. I was in the little Dixie part of
Oklahoma. My family, most of the people at the time
were Syrians, but it was great back in the day. And
I, meanwhile, before we packed up and came back to
Texas, to Austin, mailed a
And I
know now that they were kind
of stunned by the
size of it. But Frank did send it out to me. And I got
one strongly favorable report, one quite
negative. Uh-huh. But Frank liked it. And then he
sent it back to me saying, this is a fine piece of
work. It should be published. But it is too long. It
calls for some
time. It must be addressed. And so I did. And what
was ultimately published is still probably an
unbecoming long book. It's about
75% of the original. When I got it whittled down and
resubmitted it, His response then was that he
really wanted to
publish it. He thought it should be published, but
he couldn't do it at that time because he didn't
have the money in hand to do it. He had, and he
explained to me how the presses were doing this
work, that he had to wait until he got enough money
back from other publications then in the market to
put together enough money Okay, good. He was using
those revolving funds, and that's when his trick
betrayed him. Well, apparently it was, yeah, I was
not, he didn't have an advocate. And that's
something he tried to regret. The bottom had
collapsed in the markets. The average was
crossing forward about that time. That's true. I
hadn't even made that connection. And he may have.
He made a lot of references to that. I thought you
meant Wall Street. Well, that, of course, the oil
had gone up. But yes, everything else had gone
down. Stock market had gone down. I had forgotten
that. But at any rate, he said, I know that this is
important to you. And if you want to seek another
publisher, since I cannot give you a firm horizon
for this, I will encourage you to go ahead and do
that. And so I actually made a couple of other
staffs at it, unsuccessfully, most amusing. I
actually thought maybe it would be better,
because I knew of some of the trials and
tribulations over at the Hanson faculty
committee. I thought maybe it would be smarter
to go with commercial press. And I submitted it to
Hardcourt Grace.
And either the president or the vice president,
somebody wrote me the devices explaining why they
put him in the same group. He was just so smart. But
that D Brown had essentially wiped out the Indian
market for Indian things with very my heart at the
beginning. He had swamped that market with that
enormous success and that nobody, no other
commercial publisher would be publishing a major
thing for years to come in Indian history. I
thought that was . But anyhow.
Well, obviously, it was a bad judgment, because
Indian literature was popular. The popularity
was just, and I think it was indeed stimulated by a
very . And so. And I remember I sent it to Alvin
Giuseppe, or I sent him a letter of inquiry to Alvin
Giuseppe. And he wrote back and said if he would
like to bring us to do it. But I don't think he ever
used to do things like that. And he's been a hard
worker. He wrote a general book like Indians of the
West or something like that. But no. She wanted
bunnies. on
New Year's Day. What was
New Year's Day? It must have been September 4th.
There was a story in paper that Frank Ward wanted us
to go down to to start an increase. And we were just
listening. And we're sitting at the breakfast
table reading the paper. And he was saying that he
was going down to A&M to start a new press, and he
wanted... Did you think that was New Year's, you
think, 74? I think it was. Okay, good. That's good.
Uh, does that jive with the nation? Yeah,
everything, yeah, that's good. Okay. And the only
numbers I code with well are dates. Peter doesn't
trust me on any others. He is very good on all
numbers except dates. I'm not good at names,
dates, and places. How have I ever gotten to do this
story and I have never figured it out? I'm losing
names now at a rate that terrifies me. It's so
embarrassing. But at any rate,
he said that he wanted Storms to be
his first book and that he would promise me first
class production, which he certainly did very
well. It was beautiful. And so of course I was
thrilled. And I said, let me think about it. And I
consulted with him. And she said if she
had a book
ready to go, she would come back to do it. Because
they are very different. But I knew she wouldn't
get the bonus to do it. And, you know, one of her
various sides caused her to go. And so, anyhow, I
really agree. And he
then began
on his own time, while he was still
at UT Press, he also hired some freelance people on
the side. And I had forgotten the name of the woman,
because he wanted to get money. The
name of the woman who he hired on a freelance basis,
she was at UT Press, but then she moonlighted. No,
no, no. No, it was a woman named Elizabeth. A
blonde, a thin blonde woman. Probably
disagreeable. I learned from Lorena that
everybody was horrified that Frank wanted to take
her down as editor down there and everybody was
horrified that she had been infuriating authors.
And I certainly disliked her, but I kept feeling
the pain. She refused to go to A&M. She didn't want
to be part of the Poly Station life, which was far
from glamorous in those days. And she had a job
lined up in Tokyo, Tokyo University Press. And so
Margaret was not on board yet. Yeah. Yes, she had
been a student in England. She had at one time, I
think, worked for Franken.
Yes, she had. Then she left for Greenland and went
to the firm. And I've got all that somewhere in my
hand.
Anyhow, he brought her back. And I think she
arrived in the fall of 74. She was on the head in
September for the press, yeah. Okay, certainly,
maybe it was just her and Frank in the end. Well,
basically, that's it. Because she and Frank and
then Gayle. Gayle, okay. Frank hired Gayle out of
the extension office. Thank you. And Frank was
ill a bunch of times. So Margaret
carried a tremendous load. Yes. She really did.
Gaila in the beginning, although she later became
very good, Gaila in the beginning was funny. She
was in a world that she knew not of. Sure, that's
right. She was tremendously conscientious, and
so she learned. But Margaret is sharp as a whip. I
very much
regret
that I just never get to see Margaret. She is, of
course, so terribly busy with that job she has.
It's a killer job. But she was just superb, and I
really loved working with her. But the first copy
editing run-through was done by this person. I'm
going to find that . And then for book design,
Frank, actually, when he talked to me in the very
beginning about his plans, and he wanted this to be
a beautiful book. And I said, I'm sure it will be,
because I remember the blockbuster that your
first book of your team was from. I was a grad
student. Who was that? That was the Florida of the
Inca, Donna Jeanette Barnard. And that came out
while I was a grad student. And boy, did that set
people on their ear enormously. I don't think that
Samoie Lawtonville saw that as good news at all.
Boy, there was a formidable rivalry. And, of
course, Oklahoma had never done anything that
spectacular. But Frank had this tremendous feel
for the arts. But he said that he had wonderful
design. who
would be able
to do such a lovely job in this book.
She would know just the right people and the right
team to use at the beginning of her life. Jo Alice
Downs, who had retired on disability. She had a
great career. She had mental health problems. And
she just was not up to the stress of working. I
remember
mentioning this to a friend who was at one time at
the press, and he snapped, and he's usually the
kindest of men. I always thought she caused more
grief than she suffered, but I found her very nice.
And she then, he hired her to do that. And she was
able. And
then this, this I think you will not wish to comment
on. She told Frank she didn't do anything. because
the authorities
were watching her so
closely that they construed her being able to make
a little bit of money as evidence that she was not
entitled to Social Security retirement. And so,
she did it, and did it beautifully. But of course,
she... She was devoted to Frank, and he to her, and
she would have done it as a labor of love. But it was
expected in the beginning, and Frank expected
it. He paid her properly for it. But she did a
beautiful job. And then he also, in that... That
little article I was just reading,
he was talking about scarcity
and cost of payments. He had managed to find,
somewhere, as set aside, a stash of pocket money.
So he was really taking, he took the physical book
so seriously. He bought, he literally, and I can't
remember that, I used to know this, he literally
took cash, one of his pocket money, and bought it.
$170,000 worth of paper. Phenomenal. Paper. Raw
paper. He wanted paper. He thought paper was
scary. It was hard to get. It was expensive. It was
going to go up. And he lived on that paper. He
impressed him for some time. Now, no one would ever
do that again, I'm sure. And it's only these little
art presses now, or these little hobby presses
that go for that kind of quality. Yeah, that's
right. So I still remember this thing. My book was
created by a publishing company, and he and I, and
Buck, and that's at Centennial, we had two
volumes, and he and I, and Buck
Weir was in it, and I still remember it. Yeah. I
don't know about you, but everything's true. But
he was anticipating that in this article. He was
glad. He was an artist. You said what? Wyrus. Mike
Shewitz. Oh, yeah. Wyrus is the director of the
Portland Students Association. And a big
supporter. The Aggies really, really know him.
Oh, yes, I know. He was most grateful. It was a
remarkable time. Let me ask you about Texas. What
about Texas? The U.T. graphs? The U.T. graphs and
why I find left. And I think of a lot of them. My
understanding is, and these are the first towns
involved, that there was a peak. So
he dismissed his class early and he went to sleep.
Anyhow, there was and
individually established, even by university
standards, on the campus. And they have managed to
get him a saddle. One of them, remember, was the
dean of the graduate school. and I guess the vice
president.
No, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no, no They were sneering at
U.T. Press as the couch hit the desk. Because Frank
was aware. Oh, yeah. They told it to him to his face.
And he was told that when it was published he was